doc: creating a publicly_accessible rds (#276)
pivotal-cf/docs-csb-aws: howtos/publicly-accessible-dbs.md

# Use Cloud Service Broker to create a publicly accessible RDS

Topics covered in this document:
- [Existing challenges and possible solutions](#existing-challenges-and-possible-solutions)
  - [Setting `publicly_accessible` is not enough](#setting-public_accessible_is_not_enough)
- [Pitfalls when creating service plans](#pitfalls-when-creating-service-plans)
- [Pitfalls when creating service instances](#pitfalls-when-creating-service-instances)
- [Making an existing instance public](#making-an-existing-instance-public)
- [Creating a public instance from scratch](#creating-a-public-instance-from-scratch)

## Existing challenges and possible solutions

### Setting `publicly_accessible` is not enough

> This is strictly true for AWS RDS. Other IAASes use different naming conventions (GCP > public_ip),

Author: ```suggestion
```

> however the same principle still applies. Setting such field is required but not sufficient for making
> the DB instance public.

Author: ```suggestion
Setting `publicly_accessible` is required but not sufficient for making the DB instance public.
```

# Use Cloud Service Broker to create a publicly accessible RDS

Topics covered in this document:
- [Existing challenges and possible solutions](#existing-challenges-and-possible-solutions)
  - [Setting `publicly_accessible` is not enough](#setting-public_accessible_is_not_enough)
- [Pitfalls when creating service plans](#pitfalls-when-creating-service-plans)
- [Pitfalls when creating service instances](#pitfalls-when-creating-service-instances)
- [Making an existing instance public](#making-an-existing-instance-public)
- [Creating a public instance from scratch](#creating-a-public-instance-from-scratch)

## Existing challenges and possible solutions

### Setting `publicly_accessible` is not enough

> This is strictly true for AWS RDS. Other IAASes use different naming conventions (GCP > public_ip),

Reviewer: thoughts: I wouldn’t mention GCP and public ip. It doesn’t apply to this product and it doesn’t look like we’re going to create a partial view of this, at least that’s not the initial goal

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

- Assigning the db to a subnet or subnet group with the right routing conditions
- Allowing traffic from/to specific CIDR ranges using firewall/security rules

Since there isn't a one-size-fits-all solution in terms of networking architecture, CSB doesn't try
to impose an opinionated networking configuration. Instead, most services will allow/require you to
specify any custom subnet, firewall and/or security rules you want associated to your service instance.

At the time of writing (July 31st 2023), not a single one of CSB services ever attempts to create
a VPC, nor a subnet for you. For the time being, you'll have to create such infrastructure yourself
using whatever tool is available to you depending on the IAAS.

However be aware that some CSB services will assign each and every subnet present in the active VPC
unless a custom set of subnets is specified. This can take you completely by surprise, the more so
given that for some services you can also leave the VPC unspecified. CSB will pick the default one.

_Eg. **The default VPC** will be used for the Amazon RDS for PostgreSQL service when `aws_vpc_id` is unspecified_:

> https://docs.vmware.com/en/Tanzu-Cloud-Service-Broker-for-AWS/1.5/csb-aws/GUID-reference-aws-postgres.html#configuration-parameters-1

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

> ## Pitfalls when creating service plans

Reviewer: thoughts: I’m not sure if this applies here. We are assuming that the configuration of virtual networks and subnets is not correct because our CloudFoundry environment creates a configuration that does not fit well with public networks, but we cannot assume the same in the installations of customers.

Author: > Pitfall: a hidden or unsuspected danger or difficulty.

I don't see why it wouldn't fit in this guide.
Isn't this guide precisely to help customers and ourselves set up public databases correctly (when needed?)

Isn't this section describing a real and non-obvious behaviour of our product?

The section begins with the text:
- Remember to explicitly specify a VPC and subnet group in your plan **(unless you have strong reason not to)**.

Is the following affirmations wrong or misleading?
> can lead to **unexpected** and **unpredictable** network configurations

I believe **unpredictable** to be the exact description for something that is unspecified.
If a customer doesn't **specify a VPC and subnet group in [their] plan** that's exactly what **could** happen.

Reviewer 2: @fnaranjo-vmw @zucchinidev Just for context:  "the more so
given that for some services you can also leave the VPC unspecified. CSB will pick the default one."

I think we missed something here that is the fact that in AWS service broker tile configuration there is a specific field for VPC_ID that is mandatory. So VPC_ID parameter will never be empty for tile users (customers). It is true though that for open source users that deploy by doing `cf push`, this field wouldn't be required. Applications wouldn't be able to connect to the service instances created though as they are in a different VPC (TAS VPC vs default VPC) and they would have a much more greater issue than just making a database public.

- Remember to explicitly specify a VPC and subnet group in your plan (unless you have strong reason not to).  
  _Failing to do this can lead to unexpected and unpredictable network configurations to be applied to each service instance._
- Explictly set `publicly_accessible: false` in your plan if your VPC and subnets were not designed with public DBs in mind.  

>   _Failing to do this can confuse consumers of your plan if they set `publicly_accessible: true` and still can't connect to the DB._

Reviewer: thoughts: networks and subnets can be modified, however if a plan is created with this property, the value cannot be modified. I would not add this sentence or if I did, it would be a recommendation

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

Reviewer 2: VPC is specified at a broker level

Author: Thanks Marcella.

Is it impossible to override the VPC in the plan? If so, I'll need to make some changes in the troubleshooting page.

Author: [In this commit](https://github.com/pivotal-cf/docs-csb-aws/pull/276/commits/c10367bed34f5f0a2933411acab65530c283184e) I rephrased most of the pitfalls to address @pivotal-marcela-campo concern.

## Pitfalls when creating service instances

> - If setting `publicly_accessible: true` or `ipv4_enabled: true` doesn't seem to allow public connections, contact the team

Reviewer: nit-pick: remove GCP configuration

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

  in charge of creating the CSB plans for your org and ask them whether they intend to support public database instances or not.
- If setting `publicly_accessible: true` or `ipv4_enabled: true` causes your db to randomly accept public connection, contact the team

>   in charge of creating the CSB plans for your org and ask them whether they intend to support public database instances or not.

Reviewer: nit-pick: the plan may not be related to the fact that the instance does not support public connections, therefore it would not add the suggestion to contact the team in charge of creating plans. We must remember that customers are either developers or operators

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

## Making an existing instance public

Depending on the conditions in which your service instance was created it might be easier or harder to make it public.  
The most relevant factor is the number of subnets associated to the resulting database.

### Too many subnets

Some combinations of VPC and subnet groups are extremely error prone. Mainly, when neither VPC or subnet groups are specified.
In such cases, all subnets present in the default VPC will be assigned to a new subnet group and associated to your db instance.
As you can imagine, the larger the number of subnets associated to your db instance in such scenario, the harder to fix their routing.

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/CHAP_Troubleshooting.html#CHAP_Troubleshooting.Connecting

### Firewalls and security rules

Other common scenario is missing just a firewall or security rule.  
- If your service uses AWS RDS, you should specify `rds_vpc_security_group_ids` as a comma delimited list of security group ID's for instance.  

>   _You will need access to AWS Console to create the security groups. Alternatively, ask your CSB operators to provide you this list._

Reviewer: I would suggest checking that the rules created in the security rule are adequate

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

>   _You will need access to AWS Console to create the security groups. Alternatively, ask your CSB operators to provide you this list._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  _You may need to review your security rules to add the rules needed to allow network traffic._
```

> - If your service uses GCP SQL, you should specify `authorized_networks_cidrs` as a JSON array of CIDR notation IPv4 or IPv6 addresses.

Reviewer: nit-pick: this sentence does not apply

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

## Creating a public instance from scratch

- AWS RDS:
  1. [Creating a DB instance in a VPC.](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_VPC.WorkingWithRDSInstanceinaVPC.html#USER_VPC.InstanceInVPC)  

>      _You should skip **Step 4: Create a DB instance in the VPC** since we want the DB to be managed by CSB._

Reviewer: nit-pick: if we mention the step number and the order of the AWS documentation changes, we will have an outdated documentation

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

>      _You should skip **Step 4: Create a DB instance in the VPC** since we want the DB to be managed by CSB._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    _You should skip **The "Create a DB instance in the VPC" step** since we want the DB to be managed by CSB._
```

>   1. [Create a CSB instance.](https://docs.vmware.com/en/Tanzu-Cloud-Service-Broker-for-AWS/1.5/csb-aws/GUID-reference-index.html)

Reviewer: nit-pick: use a correct link structure

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.

     _Remember to specify the following fields:_  

>      `aws_vpc_id`, `rds_subnet_group`, `rds_vpc_security_group_ids`, `publicly_accessible`.

Reviewer: thoughts: this is not quite correct, the default network may have all the correct subnets and security rules to support instances with public access

Author: It is not guaranteed though. And adding new subnets in the default network might have unexpected and unpredictable consequences.
Still this guide **suggests** `to explicitly specify a VPC and subnet group in your plan (unless you have strong reason not to). ` But leaves the door open if you know what you are doing and have strong reasons to do it that way.

I see this guide as a resource for people not knowing how to proceed.
This guide is not for those who know what to do and have strong opinions on how to do it.
In fact, those people won't expose the database directly. They will probably create a bastion host:
https://repost.aws/knowledge-center/rds-connect-using-bastion-host-linux

Reviewer: Hi @fnaranjo-vmw , feel free to ignore my thoughts. They are non-blocking.
Just a kind reminder, the product is use by developers and operators. A certain knowledge is presupposed.

- GCP SQL:
  1. [Create a VPC network.](https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/create-modify-vpc-networks#creating_networks)
  1. [Create a subnet.](https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/create-modify-vpc-networks#add-subnets)
  1. [Create a CSB instance.](https://docs.vmware.com/en/Tanzu-Cloud-Service-Broker-for-GCP/1.2/csb-gcp/GUID-reference-index.html)  
     _Remember to specify the following fields:_  

>      `authorized_network_id`, `authorized_networks_cidrs` and `public_ip`.

Reviewer: nit-pick: delete the GCP references

Author: Create a code suggestion please, so I can accept it and merge it easily.
